# A designer's response to a government hearing on fusion science: question 1.
April 29, 2016

* * *

On Wednesday, April 20th, 2016, there was a [hearing](https://youtu.be/m5A5MAeoNVo?t=642) in the Energy Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology.

Three fusion industry experts presented testimonials, and answered questions, to the house representatives before them. To the best of their ability, they represented the state of the fusion industry. To the best of their ability, they pleaded for the government to continue support for achieving fusion energy.

While the hearing was highly informative, it is an example where an outside perspective can be of substantial benefit to accelerate the growth of the fusion industry.

These are the musings, taken one hearing question at a time, of a designer.

* * *

## Mr. Grayson:

> "Let's say, hypothetically, that mankind wakes up tomorrow morning and decides that we don't want to wait 10 or 11 years until we do the experiments or the construction but we want a much quicker result that can lead to electricity generation, net, from fusion projects in a shorter time frame."

> "What should we do?"

[(watch on youtube)](https://youtu.be/m5A5MAeoNVo?t=2995)

The first panelist responded, clearly without specificity, and Mr. Grayson emphasized,

> "... what should we **do**?"

The responses that followed can be paraphrased as generic at best and off-topic and demoralizing at worst:

* Look at other options
* Other options are "attractive"
* Build a facility
* Support a spectrum of ideas
* We're resource limited
* Let's not oversell our schedule
* Things take time
* Let's work on quality and safety

If the goal is fusion energy within our lifetimes, and within a decade, we need a better **do** list.

**This list isn't inspiring.** It doesn't motivate anyone to do anything. Do you feel like taking action after reading that list? It doesn't tell us why we need to do something. Fusion energy, as a mission, is the most sustainable, future-forward energy source that humanity will hope to have for the next few thousands of years. It has the potential to propel our civilization in unimaginable ways. Why doesn't this list reflect that?

**This list isn't practical.** It offers no process, no methodology, no approachable step-by-step guide for advancing the progress of fusion energy from the perspective of government. While the panelists did mention the idea of better metrics and criteria to judge alternative fusion approaches, they failed to define what this really meant. Any process towards a goal needs definitive metrics to learn from, and logistics to get it there. But what are the metrics? What processes lead to their measurement? Who is involved with these processes?

**This list isn't valuable.** There is no taste of a return of investment on this list. If resources are truly limited, then you're not doing yourself any favors by leaving out the most important part of the story most governments (and businesses) care about: money. As scientists, engineers, and technologists, we know how important this effort is, but all that effort means nothing if we cannot translate that importance into words that people around us can also care about.

* * *

## Not What You Think It Is

Those three issues with the list are intense and heavy. Let's not tread into it too far, too quickly. But let us also realize that we have to endure some chaos to create forward movement.

To honestly and relentlessly pursue our way to fusion energy, we need to first remain calm about an overwhelming situation, and then attempt to understand more by asking ourselves a critical question.

**Why did this open-ended, and potentially inspirational, question get such a despondent response?**

The fusion industry, and her experts, are only focusing on the problem they can identify.

That identified problem is a fusion device. But a fusion device is only a static piece of hardware. It's the end output.

Another question comes into play:

**How do we achieve a desired end output?**

It's easy to forget that to get to our desired output of a fusion device, we need a way of working together that will yield such a result. We need a culture of positive, flourishing diversity.

But rarely does an organization focus efforts on the process as a means of generating the desired output. Rarely do we focus on the journey and not the destination. Rarely do we seriously address our own culture as the primary barrier to our success.

* * *

What we need to do, Mr. Grayson, is to begin addressing the cultural issues of the fusion industry. Doing this will help guide people and organizations towards their goals in ways that are desirable, feasible, and viable.

If we start with culture, we will inspire the intelligent and ambitious. This solves the first problem of our **do** list.

If we start with culture, we will implement processes and methodologies that unlock the vast potential for human creativity and collaboration. This solves the second problem of our **do** list.

If we start with culture, we will create shared business value among all stakeholders and business partners who are involved. This solves the third problem of our **do** list.

If we start with culture, we will uncover all of the things we can **do** that create a future where fusion energy is realized.